# Stats-litigating-the-lipstick-index
Masters in Data Science - statistics project titled, "Litigating the Listick Index"

In this study, we investigate the level at which 30 different retail trade categories respond to or withstand economic fluctuations, and the factors that influence sales in those retail categories. The three questions addressed are: (1) do some categories of spending, as a percent of total spending, statistically increase or decrease during a recession, (2) are some categories of spending positively or negatively correlated with increases in Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and (3) what factors best predict the overall level of sales in selected categories? We utilize a two-sample mean test and simple linear regression to identify the effect of recessions periods and the percent change in GDP has on retail sales, respectively, for Questions 1 and 2. We conclude that some categories do behave differently during recessionary periods or in response to short term changes in GDP. Notably, some categories of spending increase (as a percent of total spending budget) during economic downturns. This is broadly consistent with the theory behind the “lipstick index” which suggests that consumers overweight spending in categories they may consider to be necessities or “small luxuries” during these periods. In Question 3, we construct the best predictor of future sales using a multivariate approach. We conclude that the best predictors of future sales vary by category. In all categories, including recession and/or changes in GDP enhances the predictive power of the model. 
